# Talavera

Talavera is an 18-card game inspired by Azul.

Players compete to decorate a flight of stairs according to customer
specifications.

![Talavera tile steps](./steps.jpg)

## Components

Print [the cards](cards.pdf) double-sided (long edge) on card stock or
single-sided to put in card sleeves. 

One side represents an **order card**. Each of the four colors has a
number, which represents the customer's order for that type of tile.

The others side of the cards have four squares (**tiles**) grouped by
color. Players will take turns drafting these cards in order to
fulfill their customer's order.

## Two player rules

Talavera consists of 4 rounds of two phases. Shuffle the cards and
give each player an order card. Randomly decide on a first player for
the first round. Each round, swap who drafts first so that each player
has drafts first twice.

### Draft phase

Deal four cards in the center of the table with the order side up. The
first player flips two cards and selects one to keep. The second
player flips the other two cards and selects one of the three cards
remaining in the market.

Players take turns drafting one card until the market is empty. Each
player will have two cards to place.

### Placement phase

When each player has two cards, they must pick which color to
keep. Rotate your cards so that the color you want to keep is to the
top and right. Layer the cards on the table so that all the tiles of the selected
color are visible.

> **Note**: Only the top right tile count. Tiles of other colors don't
> matter one way or another.


### Winning

Players are only eligible to win if they have fulfilled their
customer's order. That means having _at least_ as many tiles as listed
on the order card for that color.

The tie breaker is fewest excess tiles.

## Solo rules

As in the two-player game, solo Talavera consists of 4 rounds of two phases.

### Draft phase (solo)

Shuffle the deck and place the solo rules on top to cover the top
card. Deal two cards from the bottom of the deck with their tile
side face up. Select one card and discard the other. Repeat the
process with two more cards so that you have a two tile cards to place.

### Placement phase (solo)

As in the two-player game, rotate your two cards so that all the tiles
of the chosen color are visible.

### Winning (solo)

The only way to win is by fulfilling the customer's order _exactly_.

If you place _any_ excess tiles, you have lost the game.


## Design notes

I designed this game for the second [Decision Space
Jam](https://www.decisionspacepodcast.com/decisionspacejam)---18
Cards. Talavera was inspired by [my all-time favorite
game](https://jlericson.com/2023/10/02/top10.html),
[Azul](https://jlericson.com/2020/01/04/azul-review.html). I've tried
to maintain the design principles that I like best from Michael
Kiesling's classic:

1. **Open information**: All players see the same things on the table.
2. **Interactive draft**: Each time a player selects tiles, it alters
   the state of the draft for other players. Players can manipulate
   the market to ensure their own plans succeed or to thwart the plans
   of other players.
3. **Placement puzzle**: Deciding where to place tiles changes the
   relative value of tiles in future drafts. A partially completed
   color represents a risk that the color might not be available when
   your next turn to draft comes.
4. **Efficiency rewarded**: Nothing feels better than filling a color
   exactly. Nothing feels worse than being forced to take excess tiles
   that drop to the floor.
   
Dan R, on the Decision Space Discord server, helped me solve some of
the problems I originally had with the draft. He suggested putting
tiles on all 18 cards to avoid card counting. He also came up with the
idea for giving the first player to draft a choice of two cards
instead of all four.



Drafting games resist satisfying solo mode. There is [a fan-made solo
mode for
Azul](https://boardgamegeek.com/filepage/164052/soloplay-azul-v1pdf),
but Azul shines when another player's decisions impact yours. A puzzly
solo mode that takes 5-10 minutes from setup to completion seems like
a decent accomplishment.

Speaking of which, I was pleasantly surprised that I was able to make
my card representation of tiles enjoyable to arrange on the table. I
took inspiration from the splaying mechanism of Innovation to design
the tile cards. 

I'm not entirely happy with the simple color squares. I used [Talavera
tiles](https://www.lafuente.com/Mexican-Decor/Talavera-Pottery/Talavera-Tile/)
to decorate our front steps. (See the image at the top of this page.)
At some point I might replace the solid squares with authentic tile
designs. This would have the added advantage of avoiding problems for
colorblind players.

<!-- LocalWords: Talavera Azul puzzly --> 
